Skill	Description	Normal	Expert	Master	GrandMaster
Staff	Staves are blunt two-handed pole weapons effective on both offense and defense. At expert rank, skill increases your armor class. Masters have a chance of stunning their opponents, and grandmasters gain a bonus to their attack damage.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to Armor Class	Chance to stun equal to skill	Skill added to Attack Damage
Sword	The sword skill covers most types of blades longer than a knife.  Expert swordsmen gain quicker attacks. Masters may use any one-handed sword in their left hand and another weapon in their right.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill reduces recovery time	Permits use of sword in left hand	Skill added to Armor Class
Dagger	While daggers don’t do the kind of damage that a sword or an axe can deliver, they are very quick—sometimes letting you get two attacks for every one of your slower opponents'.  Expert dagger fighters can wield a dagger in their left hand while using another weapon in their right.  Master dagger fighters have a chance of doing a triple damage attack.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Permits use of dagger in left hand	Chance to cause triple damage equal to skill	Skill added to Attack Damage
Axe	While slow on the attack, axes do a lot of damage when they hit.  Expert axe fighters gain a little more speed on their attacks while master axe fighters can deliver extra damage.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill reduces recovery time	Skill added to Attack Damage	Chance to halve the Armor Class of the target.
Spear	The spear skill allows use of bladed pole weapons. Expert spearmen strike for greater damage, and masters can wield spears in one hand.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to damage.	Ability to use a spear in one hand.	Skill added to Armor Class
Bow	Bow skill covers both bow and crossbow usage.  Expert archers gain a speed increase with their weapon, while master archers can fire two arrows with every attack.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill reduces recovery time	Bow fires two arrows on every attack	Skill added to damage.
Mace	Mace skill covers all kinds of blunt trauma weapons ranging from large clubs to flails.  Expert mace swingers do extra damage with their weapons. Masters and grandmasters can stun or paralyze their opponents.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to Attack Damage	Chance to stun equal to skill	Chance to paralyze equal to skill.
Blaster	A weapon from before the Silence, their making has long since been lost.  Expert and master blasters gain double and triple accuracy with these awesome weapons.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to Attack Bonus (double effect)	Skill added to Attack Bonus (triple effect)	Skill added to Attack Bonus (quintuple effect)
Shield	Shield skill directly improves a character’s armor class while a shield is employed.  Expert and master rankings in the shield increase this defensive bonus.	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty eliminated	Skill added to Armor Class (double effect)	Protection as per Shield spell.
Leather	Leather armor is the lightest armor a character can wear.  While leather provides less protection than chain or plate armor, it also slows your character down the least.  Leather armor skill increases the protection offered by leather armor. 	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty eliminated	Skill added to Armor Class (double effect)	Skill added to Elemental (Fire/Earth/Air/Water) Resistances.
Chain	Chain armor is the medium armor type.  It provides more protection than leather and less than plate, but it also slows your character down more than leather.  Chain armor skill increases the protection offered by chain armor.  	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty halved	Recovery penalty eliminated	Receive 2/3 damage from physical attacks.
Plate	Plate armor is the heaviest armor type.  It provides the most protection, but it slows your character down more than leather or chain.  Plate armor skill increases the protection offered by plate armor.	Skill added to Armor Class	Recovery penalty halved	Receive 1/2 damage from physical attacks.	Recovery penalty eliminated
Fire Magic	All fire magic spells are all combat-oriented and include some of the strongest direct damage spells. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Air Magic	Air magic has a mixture of combat, informational and maneuvering spells, including the very useful, Fly. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Water Magic	While it does have some combat spells, water magic is more loaded with travel and item spells. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Earth Magic	Earth magic has a balanced mix of offensive and defensive spells, and includes some healing and adventuring magic.  At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Spirit Magic	Spirit magic concentrates on spells involving life and death.  Included are spells to raise the dead, which affect the undead, and which increase combat effectiveness.  At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Mind Magic	Mind magic spells directly affect the minds of their targets. They can heal or cause mental states, and cause direct damage. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Body Magic	While body magic includes some direct damage spells, it is the magic most concerned with healing. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Light Magic	Light magic includes some of the most powerful offensive an protective spells, but is only usable by clerics. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Dark Magic	Only usable by necromancers, dark magic has the most spectacular damaging and creature controlling spells available. At higher ranks you can learn more powerful spells and cast the ones you know with greater effect.	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell	Effects vary per spell
Dark Elf Ability	Dark Elves are born with abilities not shared by other races. Like the racial abilities of Vampires and Dragons, Dark Elven abilities are cast like spells, but are acquired like skills. Dark Elves start out able to cast Glamour, then gain Travelers' Boon, Blind, and Darkfire Bolt as they gain expert, master and grandmaster ranking.	Can cast Glamour which increases caster's appeal to others.	Can cast Travelers' Boon which has effects of Torchlight, Wizard Eye and Feather Fall.	Can cast Blind. Targets of the spell wander aimlessly and cannot use spells or missiles.	Can cast Darkfire, a magic bolt which does Dark and Fire damage.
Vampire Ability	Vampires are innately powerful creatures with special abilities. Like the racial abilities of Dragons and Dark Elves, Vampire abilities are cast like spells, but are acquired like skills. All Vampires can cast Lifedrain, and gain Levitate, Charm and Mistform at expert, master and grandmaster rankings.	Can cast Lifedrain which harms its target and heals the caster.	Can cast Levitate to move party over harmful surfaces taking no damage.	Can cast the Charm spell on nearby targets.	Can assume Mistform. In mistform a vampire cannot take or deal physical damage.
Dragon Ability	Dragons are powerful creatures with innate abilities. Like the racial abilities of Dark Elves and Vampires, Dragon abilities are cast like spells, but are acquired like skills. Dragons begin able to cast Fear, then gain a second breath weapon, Flight, and Wing Buffet at expert, master and grandmaster rankings. Skill in Dragon ability increases both Armor Class and breath weapon damage.	Can cast Fear which causes its targets to flee.	Gains Breath Weapon which launches an exploding fireball.	Gains Flight which allows dragon to carry party through the air.	Gains Wing Buffet which pushes back opponents.
Identify Item	The identify item skill is automatically applied when you right-click on an unidentified inventory item. If your character's skill is high enough, the item becomes identified.	Ability to identify items	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Merchant	Merchant skill helps adjust prices in your favor, whether you are buying or selling.	Skill adjusts shop prices in your favor	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Buy and sell items at cost.
Repair	The repair skill allows your characters to repair broken equipment. Higher skill levels allow them to repair better items. The skill is automatically applied when you right-click on a broken item in your inventory.	Ability to repair items	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Bodybuilding	Bodybuilding skill adds hit points directly to your characters' hit point totals. Hit points gained are equal to a character's Base Hit Points/Level time skill. Expert ranking doubles this total and master triples it.	Skill adds to Hit Points	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
Meditation	Meditation skill adds spell points directly to your characters' spell point totals.  Spell points gained are equal to a character's Base Spell Points/Level times skill. Expert ranking doubles this total and master triples it.	Skill adds to Spell Points	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
Perception	The perception skill gives your characters a chance to notice hidden doors and traps, and to avoid damage from traps when they are triggered. At expert and master levels, your characters will notice more. Grandmasters will see all hidden objects.	Skill increases chance to avoid traps and notice treasures	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Regeneration	Characters with the regeneration skill will slowly regain lost hit points over time. Higher skill levels increase how quickly damage is healed.	Increases hit points regained over time	Increases hit points regained over time	Larger increase to hit points regained over time	Largest increase of hit points regained over time
Disarm Traps	The disarm traps skill is checked automatically when you open a trapped chest or other container.  A higher skill in disarm traps gives a better chance of disarming the trap.  Experts and masters enjoy an increased chance of disarming traps, while grandmasters always succeed.	Skill increases chance to disarm traps on chests	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	100% success
Dodging	Dodging skill can be used only when you are not wearing armor or using a shield.  Additional ranks of dodging will increase your armor class while not wearing armor.	Skill added to Armor Class	Skill added to Armor Class (double effect)	Skill added to Armor Class (triple effect)	Skill is usable while wearing leather armor
Unarmed	Unarmed skill is your ability to use only your hands and feet in combat, no weapons.  This skill only works with your hands empty.  Additional ranks of unarmed skill will increase your chance to hit.	Skill added to Attack Bonus	Skill added to damage.	Skill added to Attack Bonus and damage (double effect)	Chance to evade an incoming attack equal to skill
Identify Monster	The identify monster skill is applied when you right-click on a monster. At basic level, the skill allows you to see a monster's hit points and armor class. At higher expertise levels, more information is displayed.	Learn Hit Points and Armor Class of monster	Learn Attack type and damage of monster	Learn which spells the monster can cast.	Learn the monster's resistances
Armsmaster	Armsmaster skill represents the warrior's tricks of the trade.  Initially, armsmaster reduces the recovery times of your melee weapons. At higher expertise levels it gives you a bonus to hit then to damage.	Skill reduces the recovery time of all melee weapons	Skill added to Attack Bonus of all melee weapons	Skill added to damage of all melee weapons	Double all the previous bonuses
Stealing	Stealing allows you to take items that don't belong to you from shops, or to steal money or items from people.  Being caught, however, can lead to severe fines-- and outstanding debt is a punishable offense in castles.	Skill gives chance to steal	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
Alchemy	The alchemy skill allows you to mix potions.  Without the alchemy skill, you barely have the knowledge to make a simple potion, though alchemy skill is added to the strength value of the base ingredient to determine the strength of a simple potion. Higher rankings allow you to mix more complicated potions.	Allows mixing of simple potions to make complex potions	Allows mixing of complex potions to make compound potions	Allows mixing of compound potions to make white potions	Allows mixing of white potions to make black potions
Learning	The learning skill directly increases the experience a character receives.  Every point of skill is a percent of awarded experience that is given as a bonus (plus a starting bonus of 9%).  Five skill points would turn a 100 experience point award into a 114 experience point award.  Expert doubles and master triples this bonus, so 10 points of learning at master rank would give a 39% bonus to all experience point gain.	Skill increases amount of experience received	Double effect of skill	Triple effect of skill	Quintuple effect of skill
