										
#	Lvl	Fire Spells	Res	Short Name	Spell Description	Normal	Expert	Master	Grand Master	Stats
1	1	Torch Light	none	Torch Light	Torch Light increases the radius of light surrounding your party in the dark.  	Duration 1 hour per point of  skill	Brighter light	Brightest light	Faster recovery	P
2	2	Fire Bolt	Fire	Fire Bolt	"Launches a burst of fire at a single target.  Damage is 1-3 points of damage per point of skill in Fire Magic.   Firebolt is safe, effective and has a low casting cost."	Slow rate of recovery	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
3	3	Fire Resistance	none	Prot Fire	Increases all your characters’ resistance to fire damage by an amount equal to your skill in Fire Magic. The effect lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
4	4	Fire Aura	none	Fire Aura	"Causes a weapon that has no special abilities to burn with a magical fire, giving the weapon the ""of Fire"" ability.  This spell lasts for one hour per point of skill in Fire Magic."	"Grants ""of Fire"""	"Grants ""of Flame"""	"Grants ""of Infernos"""	"Grants ""of Infernos"" permanently"	P
5	5	Haste	none	Haste	"Reduces the time it takes for all of your characters to recover from casting spells or attacking with their weapons.  When the spell wears off, they become weak.."	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 1 minute per skill point	Duration 1 hour + 3 minutes per skill point	Duration 1 hour + 4 minutes per skill point	PM
6	6	Fireball	Fire	Fireball	"Fires a ball of fire at a single target. When it hits, the ball explodes damaging all those nearby, including your characters if they're too close.  Fireball does 1-6 points of damage per point of skill in Fire Magic."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
7	7	Fire Spike	Fire	Fire Spike	Drops a Fire Spike on the ground that waits for a creature to get near it before exploding.  Fire Spikes last until you leave the map or they are triggered.	n/a	"Causes 1-6 points of damage per point of skill, 5 spikes maximum"	"Causes 1-8 points of damage per point of skill, 7 spikes maximum"	"Causes 1-10 points of damage per point of skill, 9 spikes maximum"	PC
8	8	Immolation	Fire	Immolation	Surrounds your characters with a very hot fire that is only harmful to others.  The spell will deliver 1-6 points of damage per point of skill to all nearby monsters for as long as they remain in the area of effect. 	n/a	n/a	Duration 1 minute per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	PC
9	9	Meteor Shower	Fire	Meteor Shwr	Summons flaming rocks from the sky which fall in a large radius surrounding your chosen target.  Try not to be near the victim when you use this spell.  A single meteor does 8 points of damage plus 1 per point of skill in Fire Magic.  This spell only works outdoors.	n/a	n/a	Moderate rate of recovery and 16 meteors	Fast rate of recovery and 20 rocks	PMEC
10	10	Inferno	Fire	Inferno	"Inferno burns all monsters in sight when cast, excluding your characters.  One or two castings can clear out a room of weak or moderately powerful creatures. Each monster takes 12 points of damage plus 2 per point of skill in Fire Magic.  This spell only works indoors."	n/a	n/a	Moderate rate of recovery	Fast rate of recovery	PC
11	11	Incinerate	Fire	Incinerate	"Among the strongest direct damage spells available, Incinerate inflicts massive damage on a single target.  Only the strongest of monsters can expect to survive this spell.  Damage is 15 points plus 1-15 per point of skill in Fire Magic."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PMC
	Lvl	Air Spells	Res		Spell Description					
12	1	Wizard Eye	none	Wizard Eye	Wizard Eye causes the automap located in the lower right corner of the adventure screen to show the locations of monsters and other points of interest while outdoors.  The spell lasts 1 hour per point of skill in Air Magic.	Only shows terrain and monsters	Shows treasure	Shows other points of interest	Casting cost is free	P
13	2	Feather Fall	Air	Feather Fall	Feather Fall prevents your characters from being hurt when falling more than ten feet by slowing the speed of their fall.  Feather Fall affects your entire party with one casting and has a duration based on your skill in Air Magic. 	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Faster recovery	P
14	3	Air Resistance	none	Air Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to air damage by an amount equal to your skill in Air. The protection lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
15	4	Sparks	Air	Sparks	"Sparks fires small balls of lightning into the world that bounce around until they hit something or dissipate. It is hard to tell where they will go, so this spell is best used in a room crowded with small monsters. Each spark does 2 points plus 1 per point of skill in Air Magic."	"Moderate recovery rate, 3 sparks"	"Faster recovery rate, 5 sparks"	"Faster recovery rate, 7 sparks"	"Fastest recovery rate, 9 sparks"	PMEC
16	5	Jump	none	Jump	"Jump launches your party 60 feet into the air, allowing you to reach high ledges and jump large crevasses.  Your party takes no falling damage from the jump."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	P
17	6	Shield	none	Shield	Halves damage from incoming ranged attacks (such as rocks and arrows) by slowing the missiles down just before they hit.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
18	7	Lightning Bolt	Air	Lightning	Lightning Bolt discharges electricity from the caster’s hand to a single target.  It always hits and does 1-8 points of damage per point of skill in Air Magic.	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
19	8	Invisibility	none	Invisibility	"Invisibility works on the minds of nearby creatures, making them unable to notice the party unless spoken to or attacked.  Any attack you make, regardless of whether or not it hits or misses, will break this spell. This spell can't be cast while hostile monsters are nearby."	n/a	n/a	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	P
20	9	Implosion	Air	Implosion	"Implosion is a nasty spell that affects a single target by destroying the air around it, causing a sudden inrush from the surrounding air, a thunderclap, and 10 points plus 1-10 points of damage per point of skill in Air Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Fast recovery rate	PMC
21	10	Fly	none	Fly	"Grants the power of flight to your characters!  This spell is very expensive and only works outdoors, but it is very useful.  Fly will drain one spell point every five minutes it is in use (i.e. when you aren't touching the ground)."	n/a	n/a	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	No spell point drain	P
22	11	Starburst	Air	Starburst	"Calls stars from the heavens to smite and burn your enemies.  Twenty stars are called, and the damage for each star is 20 points plus 1 per point of skill in Air Magic. Try not to get caught in the blast! This spell only works outdoors."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PEC
	Lvl	Water Spells	Res		Spell Description					
23	1	Awaken	none	Awaken	"Automatically awakens all of your characters from a normal sleep and will awaken them from a magical sleep if they haven't had the sleep condition for too long.  The greater your skill in Water Magic, the longer the sleep condition could have been present before this spell becomes ineffective."	Works if asleep less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if asleep less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if asleep less than 1 day per point of skill	Fast recovery rate	P
24	2	Poison Spray	Water	Poison Spr	"Sprays poison at monsters directly in front of your characters.  Damage is low, but few monsters have resistance to Water Magic, so it usually works.  Each shot does 2 points of damage plus 1-2 per point of skill."	"Slow rate of recovery, 1 shot"	"Faster recovery rate, 3 shots"	"Faster recovery rate, 5 shots"	"Fastest recovery rate, 7 shots"	P
25	3	Water Resistance	none	Water Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to water damage by an amount equal to your skill in Water Magic. The protection lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
26	4	Ice Bolt	Water	Ice Bolt	Fires a bolt of ice at a single target.  The missile does 1-4 points of damage per point of skill in Water Magic.	Slow rate of recovery	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
27	5	Water Walk	none	Water Walk	"Only useful outdoors, Water Walk lets your characters walk along the surface of water without sinking.  In addition to its casting cost, one spell point is expended every 20 minutes while your party is in contact with water."	n/a	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	No spell point drain	P
28	6	Recharge Item	Water	Recharge	"Recharges any magic item that uses charges.  Every time this spell is cast, the item permanently loses 50% - 1 per point of skill in Water magic of its charges. "	n/a	Item loses 50% - 1 per point of skill	Item loses 30% - 1 per point of skill	Item loses 20% - 1 per point of skill	PE
29	7	Acid Burst	none	Acid Burst	Acid burst squirts a jet of extremely caustic acid at a single victim.  It always hits and does 9 points of damage plus 1-9 per point of skill.  	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMC
30	8	Enchant Item	Water	Enchant Item	"When cast, this spell has a chance of imbuing a normal item with magical powers.  The chance of success is 10% per point of skill in Water Magic.  Grandmasters can manage better enchantments."	n/a	n/a	Moderate strength enchantments	Strong enchantments	P
31	9	Town Portal	none	Town Portal	"Town Portal teleports the party to any town where the party has drunk from the central fountain.  Town Portal has a 10% chance per point of Water Magic skill of working when cast, and cannot be used while hostile monsters are nearby.  "	n/a	n/a	Does not work while hostile monsters are nearby	Works while hostile monsters are nearby	P
32	10	Ice Blast	Water	Ice Blast	"Fires a ball of ice in the direction the caster is facing.  The ball will shatter when it hits something, launching 7 shards of ice in all directions except the caster’s.  The shards will ricochet until they strike a creature or melt.  Each shard does 12 points of damage plus 1-6 per point of skill in Water Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate and 7 shards	Faster recovery rate and 9 shards	PMEC
33	11	Lloyd's Beacon	none	Lloyd's	Lloyd’s Beacon lets you place a marker at a location you want to teleport back to in the future.  Just how far in the future depends on your skill in Water Magic.  Cast this spell whenever you wish to either place a marker or return to one.  Each beacon will decay after 1 week per point of skill in Water magic after it is placed.	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Earth Spells	Res		Spell Description					
34	1	Stun	Earth	Stun	"Slaps a monster with magical force, forcing it to recover from the stun spell before it can do anything else.  Stun also knocks monsters back a little, giving you a chance to get away while the getting is good.  The greater your skill in Earth Magic, the greater the effect of the spell."	Normal effect	Stronger effect	Stronger effect	Strongest effect	PC
35	2	Slow	Earth	Slow	"Halves the walking speed and doubles the recovery rate of a single monster.  Slow makes sure a monster will attack you half as often, and will have a harder time catching up to you if you choose to run.  The duration of this spell is 1 minute per point of skill in Earth Magic."	Normal effect	Duration 5 min per point of skill	Monster slows to 1/4 speed	Monster slows to 1/8 speed	PC
36	3	Earth Resistance	none	Earth Resist	Increases all of your characters’ resistance to Earth Magic damage by an amount equal to your skill in Earth. The effect lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
37	4	Deadly Swarm	Earth	Swarm	"Summons a swarm of biting, stinging insects to bedevil a single target.  The swarm does 5 points of damage plus 1-3 per point of skill in Earth Magic."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PC
38	5	Stone Skin	none	Stone Skin	Increases all of your characters' armor class by 5 + 1 point per point of skill in Earth Magic.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
39	6	Blades	Earth	Blades	"Fires a rotating, razor-thin metal blade at a single monster.  The blade does 1-9 points of damage per point of skill in Earth Magic."	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PC
40	7	Stone to Flesh	none	Stone - Flesh	"Removes the stoned condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Earth Magic the longer the condition can have been present before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if stoned less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if stoned less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	P
41	8	Rock Blast	Earth	Rock Blast	"Releases a magical stone into the world that will explode when it comes into contact with a creature or enough time passes.  The rock will bounce and roll until it finds a resting spot, so be careful not to be caught in the blast.  The explosion causes 10 points of damage plus 1-10 points of damage per point of skill in Earth Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMC
42	9	Telekinesis	none	Telekinesis	"Telekinesis lets you manipulate an object at a distance.  Switches can be thrown, objects picked up, and doors opened with this spell, all from a nice safe distance from those nasty traps."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	P
43	10	Death Blossom	Earth	Death Blsm	"Launches a magical stone which bursts in air, sending shards of explosive earth raining to the ground.  The damage is 20 points plus 2 per point of skill in Earth Magic for each shard.  This spell can only be used outdoors."	n/a	n/a	Moderate rate of recovery	"Faster recovery rate, double effect of skill"	PC
44	11	Mass Distortion	Earth	Mass Distort	"Increases the weight of a single target enormously for an instant, causing internal damage equal to 25% of the monster’s hit points plus another 2% per point of skill in Earth Magic.  The bigger they are, the harder they fall."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PMC
	Lvl	Spirit Spells	Res		Spell Description					
45	1	Detect Life	none	Detect Life	Allows the party to see an opponent's current health as an exact hit point number when you right-click on a creature.	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill.	Duration 30 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Shows spells	P
46	2	Bless	none	Bless	Blessed characters have an increased chance to hit monsters in hand to hand combat and with missiles.  A character’s bonus to hit is increased by 5 + 1 per point of skill in Spirit Magic.	Duration 1 hour plus 5 minutes per point of skill	Spell affects entire party	Duration 1 hour plus 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
47	3	Fate	Spirit	Fate	"Fate can be used on a character to increase his chance to hit, or on a monster to decrease its chance.  The chance is modified by 20 + 1 per point of skill in Spirit Magic, and lasts until the target attacks, or 5 minutes go by."	Bonus or penalty 20 + 1 per point of skill	Bonus or penalty 20 + 2 per point of skill	Bonus or penalty 20 +4 per point of skill	Bonus or penalty 20 + 6 per point of skill	PM
48	4	Turn Undead	Spirit	Turn Undead	Forces all visible undead monsters to flee until the duration of Turn Undead runs out.  This spell lasts for 3 minutes plus one minute per point of skill in Spirit Magic.	Duration 3 minutes plus 1 per point of skill	Duration 3 minutes plus 3 per point of skill	Duration 3 minutes plus 5 per point of skill	Faster recovery	PM
49	5	Remove Curse	none	Rmv. Curse	"Removes the cursed condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Spirit Magic the longer the condition can have been present before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if cursed less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if cursed less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	P
50	6	Preservation	none	Preservation	"Preservation more tightly binds the soul to the body. This will delay death due to massive hit point loss, but will not stop a character from going unconscious. If a preserved character's hit points are too low when the spell wears off, he or she will die."	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Works on entire party	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	P
51	7	Heroism	none	Heroism	Heroism increases the damage a character does on a successful attack by 5 + 1 point per point of skill in Spirit Magic. This spell affects the entire party at once.	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour + 1 hour per point of skill	PM
52	8	Spirit Lash	Spirit	Spirit Lash	"This spell weakens the link between a target's body and soul, causing 10 + 2-8 points of damage per point of skill in Spirit Magic to all monsters near the caster."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMC
53	9	Raise Dead	none	Raise Dead	"Raises a character from the dead if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Spirit Magic the longer a character can have been dead before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to raise the character short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple.  Casting this spell will leave your character in the weak condition."	n/a	n/a	Works if dead less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	P
54	10	Shared Life	none	Shared Life	"Shared Life combines the life force of your characters and redistributes it amongst them as evenly as possible.  All current hit points are totaled and 3 extra points per point of skill in Spirit Magic is added to this total. Then the points are distributed back to the characters, with no individual character being allowed to have more points than his maximum total hit points."	n/a	n/a	Adds 3 hit points per point of skill to the pool	Adds 4 hit points per point of skill to the pool	P
55	11	Resurrection	none	Resurrection	"Resurrects a character whose body has been destroyed.  Recovery rate is very slow, but will be faster for characters with a higher skill in Spirit Magic.  The resurrected character will be in a weak condition after this spell is cast."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Mind Spells	Res		Spell Description					
56	1	Telepathy	none	Telepathy	"Caster reads the target's mind, finding out exactly how much gold and what items the target has."	Slow recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	P
57	2	Remove Fear	none	Remove Fear	"Removes the afraid condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Mind Magic the longer the condition can have been present before the spell no longer is effective.  After that, the condition may only be removed by resting or at a temple."	Works if afraid less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if afraid less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if afraid less than 1 day per point of skill	Works no matter how much time has passed	P
58	3	Mind Resistance	none	Mind Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to Mind Magic damage by an amount equal to your skill in Mind Magic. The protection lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	PC
59	4	Mind Blast	Mind	Mind Blast	Fires a bolt of mental force which damages a single target's nervous system.  Mind Blast does 3 points of damage plus 1-3 per point of skill in Mind Magic.	Slow recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMC
60	5	Charm	Mind	Charm	"Calms a single targeted creature and removes any hostile feelings it has towards your characters.  If this creature takes any damage, it will immediately become hostile again."	n/a	Duration 5 min per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Spell lasts until party leaves the map target is in	P
61	6	Cure Paralysis	Mind	Cure P-lyze	"Cures paralysis if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Mind Magic the longer the character can have been paralyzed before the ""point of no return"" is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if paralyzed less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if paralyzed less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	PC
62	7	Berserk	Mind	Berserk	"Causes a single monster to go mad with battle lust, attacking the nearest living creature until the spell wears off."	n/a	Duration 5 min per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration is 1 hour per point of skill	PC
63	8	Mass Fear	Mind	Mass Fear	"All creatures in the caster’s sight fear the caster and flee.  If a creature takes damage while under the influence of this spell, the spell will be broken. The duration of Mass Fear is 3 minutes per point of skill in Mind Magic.  Mass Fear will not work on undead creatures. "	n/a	n/a	Duration 3 minutes plus 5 per point of skill	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	PC
64	9	Cure Insanity	none	Cure Insane	"Cures insanity if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Mind Magic the longer the character can have been insane before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	n/a	Works if insane less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	P
65	10	Psychic Shock	Mind	Psy - Shock	"Similar to Mind Blast, Psychic Shock targets a single creature with mind damaging magic--only it has a much greater effect.  Psychic Shock does 12 points of damage plus 1-12 per point of skill in Mind Magic."	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMC
66	11	Enslave	Mind	Enslave	"Takes control of target's mind for 10 minutes per point of skill in Mind Magic.  Enslaved creatures will fight monsters that are hostile to the caster for the duration of the spell, and will not fight with the caster even if attacked by the caster or his friends.  This spell will not work on the undead."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Body Spells	Res		Spell Description					
67	1	Cure Weakness	none	Cure Weak	"Cures the weak condition from a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Body Magic the longer the character can have been weak before the spell will no longer work.  After that, the condition may be removed by resting or at a temple."	Works if weak less than 3 minutes per point of skill	Works if weak less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if weak less than 1 day per point of skill	Works no matter how much time has passed	P
68	2	Heal	none	Heal	Cures hit points on a single target when cast.  The number cured is equal to 5 plus 2 per point of skill in Body Magic.	Cures 5 hit points plus 2 per point of skill	Cures 5 hit points plus 3 per point of skill and can be cast on distant targets	Cures 5 hit points plus 4 per point of skill	Cures 5 hit points plus 5 per point of skill	P
69	3	Body Resistance	none	Body Resist	Increases all your characters’ resistance to Body Magic damage by an amount equal to your skill in Body Magic. The protection lasts one hour per point of skill.	1 point resistance per point of skill	2 points resistance per point of skill	3 points resistance per point of skill	4 points resistance per point of skill	P
70	4	Harm	Body	Harm	Directly inflicts magical damage upon a single creature.  Harm does 8 points of damage plus 1-2 per point of skill in Body Magic.	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
71	5	Regeneration	none	Regeneration	Gives the regeneration ability to a single character.  Regeneration will slowly heal back hit points over time while the spell is active.	n/a	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Faster hit point recovery rate	Fastest hit point recovery rate	P
72	6	Cure Poison	none	Cure Poison	"Cures poison in a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Body Magic the longer the character can have been poisoned before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	Works if poisoned less than 1 hour per point of skill	Works if poisoned less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	P
73	7	Hammerhands	none	Hammerhand	"Hammerhands magically enhances the skill of an unarmed combatant, allowing his strikes to land more precisely against an opponent's weak spots.  Hammerhands-aided attacks inflict extra Body damage equal to the physical damage caused by the unarmed attack."	n/a	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Spell affects entire party	PM
74	8	Cure Disease	none	Cure Disease	"Cures disease in a character if you cast this spell in time.  The greater the skill and rank in Body Magic the longer the character can have been diseased before the “point of no return” is reached.  After that, the only way to remove the condition short of Divine Intervention is to visit a temple."	n/a	n/a	Works if diseased less than 1 day per point of skill	No time limit	P
75	9	Protection from Magic	none	Pro V. Magic	"Protection from Magic affects the entire party at once, granting immunity to certain spells and monster abilities that cause debilitation conditions.  These are:  Poison, Disease, Stone, Paralyze, and Weak.  Every time this spell saves a character from an effect, it weakens.  The spell can survive 1 attack per point of skill in body magic--after that, Protection from Magic is broken."	n/a	n/a	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Grants immunity to death and eradication effects	P
76	10	Flying Fist	Body	Flying Fist	Flying Fist throws a heavy magical force at a single opponent that does 20 points of damage plus 1-10 per point of skill in Body Magic.	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PMEC
77	11	Power Cure	none	Power Cure	Cures hit points of all characters in your party at once.  The number cured is equal to 10 plus 5 per point of skill in Body Magic.	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	PM
	Lvl	Light Spells	Res		Spell Description					
78	1	Light Bolt	Light	Light Bolt	Fires a bolt of light at a single target that does 1-4 points of damage per point of skill in light magic.  Damage vs. Undead is doubled.	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PM
79	2	Destroy Undead	Light	Dest Undead	"Calls upon the power of heaven to undo the evil magic that extends the lives of the undead, inflicting 16 points of damage plus 1-16 per point of skill in Light Magic upon a single, unlucky target.  This spell only works on the undead."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	P
80	3	Dispel Magic	none	Dispel Magic	"Removes all spells on all creatures in the caster’s sight, both helpful and harmful.  Recovery is reduced by an amount equal to skill in Light Magic."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PM
81	6	Paralyze	Light	Paralyze	"Paralyze temporarily prevents a monster from moving or attacking for the duration of this spell, which is 3 minutes per point of skill in Light Magic.  You are free to attack your helpless target to your heart's content--paralyzed monsters cannot retaliate."	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PM
82	5	Summon Wisp	none	Summon	Summons a Dancing Light to fight for the party.  It will stay until the spell duration runs out or it is destroyed.  You can have no more than 1 elemental summoned at once.	n/a	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill.  1 Dancing Light maximum.	Summons a Wisp.  Duration 15 minutes per point of skill. 3 Wisps maximum.	Summons a Will O' Wisp.  5 Will O' Wisps maximum.	PM
83	6	Day of the Gods	none	Day -o- Gods	Temporarily increases all seven stats on all your characters by three times your skill in Light Magic.  This spell lasts until you rest.	n/a	All spells cast at three times skill	All spells cast at four times skill	All spells cast at five times skill	P
84	7	Prismatic Light	Light	Pris Light	Inflicts 25 points of damage plus 1 per point of skill in Light Magic on all creatures in sight.  This spell can only be cast indoors.	n/a	n/a	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	PC
85	8	Day of Protection	none	Day -o- Prot	"Simultaneously casts Protection from Fire, Air, Water, Earth, Mind, and Body, plus Feather Fall and Wizard Eye on all your characters at four times your skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	All spells cast at four times skill	All spells cast at five times skill	PMEC
86	9	Hour of Power	none	Hour -o- Pwr	"Simultaneously casts Haste, Heroism, Shield, Stone Skin, and Bless on all your characters at four times your skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	All spells cast at four times skill	All spells cast at five times skill	PMC
87	10	Sunray	Light	Sunray	"Sunray is the second most devastating damage spell in the game. It does 20 points of damage plus 1-20 points per point of skill in Light Magic, by concentrating the light of the sun on one unfortunate creature. It only works outdoors during the day."	n/a	n/a	Slow recovery rate	Moderate recovery rate	PC
88	11	Divine Intervention	none	Divine Inter	"Three times per day you may call upon the heavens to heal your characters of all damage, restore your spell points and remove all adverse conditions.  The gods exact a price, however, aging the caster 10 years for each Divine Intervention.  Recovery from this spell is shortened with skill in Light Magic."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Dark Spells	Res		Spell Description					
89	1	Reanimate	None	Reanimate	"Reanimate allows you to raise a lifeless creature from the dead (sort of).  The zombie will fight against monsters hostile to the caster until it is killed (again) or until the party leaves the map.  The zombie will have 10 hit points per point of skill in dark magic, up to its normal maximum. This spell cannot be cast on party members."	Creature gets 20 hit points per skill point	Creature gets 30 hit points per skill point	Creature gets 40 hit points per skill point	Creature gets 50 hit points per skill point	PM
90	2	Toxic Cloud	Dark	Toxic Cloud	A poisonous cloud of noxious gases is formed in front of the caster and moves slowly away from your characters.  The cloud does 25 points of damage plus 1-10 per point of skill in Dark Magic and lasts until something runs into it.	Moderate recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	PMEC
91	3	Vampiric Weapon	none	Vamp Weap	"Enchants a weapon with the Vampiric ability.  Damage inflicted on monsters struck by this weapon will be given to the weapon's wielder as extra hit points, up to his or her normal hit point maximum."	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Faster recovery rate	Fastest recovery rate	Permanent	P
92	4	Shrinking Ray	Dark	Shrink Ray	"Shrinks even the grandest of monsters down to more manageable sizes. Duration of this spell is 5 minutes per point of skill in Dark Magic. Depending on the caster's expertise, a shrunken monster deals one half, one third, or one quarter its normal damage while shrunk."	Reduces monster size to one half normal	Reduces monster size to one third normal	Reduces monster size to one fourth normal	Will affect other monsters near the target	PC
93	5	Shrapmetal	Dark	Shrapmetal	"Fires a blast of hot, jagged metal in front of the caster, striking any creature that gets in the way.  Each piece inflicts 1-6 points of damage per point of skill in Dark Magic."	n/a	Faster recovery rate and 5 fragments	Faster recovery rate and 7 fragments	Fastest recovery rate and 9 fragments	PMC
94	6	Control Undead	Dark	Cntrl Undead	"Takes control of an undead target's mind for 3 minutes per point of skill in Dark Magic.  Controlled undead will fight monsters that are hostile to the caster for the duration of the spell, and will not fight with the caster even if attacked by the caster or his friends."	n/a	Duration 3 minutes per point of skill	"Faster recovery rate, duration 5 minutes per point of skill"	"Fastest recovery rate, lasts until party leaves map"	P
95	7	Pain Reflection	Dark	Pain Reflect	"When a monster hits a character with Pain Reflection active, the monster takes damage equal to what it inflicted on the character."	n/a	Duration 1 hour + 5 minutes per point of skill	Affects entire party	Duration 1 hour + 15 minutes per point of skill	PM
96	8	Dark Grasp	None	Dark Grasp	"This spell surrounds its target with the power of raw darkness, rendering it unable to fire missile attacks or cast spells. Further the target's movement is slowed, its armor class is halved and it does half damage when striking in melee combat."	n/a	n/a	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	P
97	9	Dragon Breath	Dark	Drag Breath	"Dragon Breath empowers the caster to exhale a cloud of toxic vapors that targets a single monster and damage all creatures nearby, doing 1-25 points of damage per point of skill in Dark Magic."	n/a	n/a	Slow recovery rate	Moderate recovery rate	PMEC
98	10	Armageddon	Dark	Armageddon	"This spell is the town killer. Armageddon inflicts 50 points of damage plus 1 point of damage for every point of Dark skill your character has to every creature on the map, including all your characters. It can only be cast three times per day and only outdoors.  "	n/a	n/a	Can only be cast three times per day	Can only be cast four times per day	PC
99	11	Souldrinker	Dark	Souldrinker	"This horrible spell sucks the life from all creatures in sight, friend or enemy.  Souldrinker then transfers that life to your party in much the same fashion as Shared Life.  Damage (and healing) is 25 + 1-8 per point of skill."	n/a	n/a	n/a	This spell is as good as it will ever get!	P
	Lvl	Dark Elf Abilities	Res		Spell Description					
100	1	Glamour	none	Glamour	This ability grants a more appealing manner and appearance to whomever the Dark Elf deals with.  The net effect is a bonus to Merchant skill for the duration of the ability's effect.	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill.	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Larger bonus to Merchant skill	P
101	2	Travelers' Boon	none	Travel Boon	"This ability simultaneously casts Torchlight, Wizard Eye, and Feather Fall at Expert level of mastery."	n/a	Duration 30 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Duration 2 hours per point of skill	P
102	3	Blind	Mind	Blind	"This ability strikes its target blind. Affected creatures cannot perform missile attacks or cast spells, and wander aimlessly until the effect wears off."	n/a	n/a	Duration 5 minutes per point of skill	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	P
103	4	Darkfire Bolt	DarkFire	Darkfire	"This frightening ability grants the Dark Elf the power to wield Darkfire, a dangerous combination of the powers of Dark and Fire. Any target stricken by the Darkfire bolt resists with either its Fire or Dark resistance--whichever is lower. Damage is 1-17 per point of skill."	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	P
104	5	Unused!!!	0	0						
105	6	Unused!!!	0	0						
106	7	Unused!!!	0	0						
107	8	Unused!!!	0	0						
108	9	Unused!!!	0	0						
109	10	Unused!!!	0	0						
110	11	Unused!!!	0	0						
	Lvl	Vampire Abilities	Res		Spell Description					
111	1	Lifedrain	Dark	Lifedrain	Lifedrain allows the vampire to damage his or her target and simultaneously heal based on the damage done in the Lifedrain.  This ability does 3 points of damage plus 1-3 points of damage per skill.	Vampire heals 1/3 the damage done by Lifedrain	Faster recovery rate	Damage 5 points plus 1-5 per point of skill	Damage 7 points plus 1-7 per point of skill	P
112	2	Levitate	none	Levitate	"This ability allows the vampire to levitate the party slightly off the ground, avoiding damage from drowning or lava, and also avoiding setting off ground traps."	n/a	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	Duration 3 hours per point of skill	P
113	3	Charm	Mind	Charm	A vampire using this ability can charm a small group of targets in close proximity.	n/a	n/a	Duration 10 minutes per point of skill	Duration permanent	P
114	4	Mistform	none	Mistform	"Mistform allows the vampire to render himself immune to physical damage.  However, a vampire in Mistform cannot perform any physical attacks.  Vampires in Mistform are able to use spells and abilities and are affected by spells and abilities."	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	P
115	5	Unused!!!	0	0						
116	6	Unused!!!	0	0						
117	7	Unused!!!	0	0						
118	8	Unused!!!	0	0						
119	9	Unused!!!	0	0						
120	10	Unused!!!	0	0						
121	11	Unused!!!	0	0						
	Lvl	Dragon Abilities	Res		Spell Description					
122	1	Fear	Mind	Fear	"This ability allows the Dragon to strike fear in its opponents' thoughts. If the target doesn't resist the effects, it will flee in panic for the duration of the effect."	Duration 3 minutes plus 1 per point of skill	Duration 5 minutes plus 1 per point of skill	Affects target and all creatures within immediate vicinity	Affects all creatures within view	P
123	2	Flame Blast	Fire	Flame Blast	"This ability is an upgraded version of the normal Dragon breath weapon attack.  It acts much like a fireball, striking its target and exploding out to hit everything near it, except the explosion does much more damage than most fireballs."	n/a	Damage 10 points plus 1-10 points per point of skill	Damage 11 points plus 1-11 points per point of skill	Damage 12 points plus 1-12 points per point of skill	P
124	3	Flight	none	Flight	"Allows the Dragon to carry the party in flight.  This ability is expensive and only works outdoors, but it is very useful.  Flight will drain one spell point every five minutes it is in use (i.e. when you aren't touching the ground)."	n/a	n/a	Duration 1 hour per point of skill	No spell point drain	
125	4	Wing Buffet	none	Buffet	This ability allows a Dragon to push back opponents with wing generated wind--great for pushing them back before hitting them with a Flame Blast.	n/a	n/a	n/a	n/a	
126	5	Unused!!!	0	0	0					
127	6	Unused!!!	0	0	0					
128	7	Unused!!!	0	0	0					
129	8	Unused!!!	0	0						
130	9	Unused!!!	0	0						
131	10	Unused!!!	0	0						
132	11	Unused!!!	0	0
